[Unknown]: I. V. M.
[Amit Varma]: I. V. M.
[Amit Varma]: V. M.
[Amit Varma]: Vikram Doctor is an editor at the Economic Times, and I often describe him as the best
[Amit Varma]: food writer I have ever read. That's because when Vikram writes about food, he's also writing
[Amit Varma]: about culture, geopolitics and history at the same time, with equal love and passion
[Amit Varma]: shining through for all of them. Through his columns, I've learned both about how a lot
[Amit Varma]: of Indian food originated outside India, and is yet, at the same time, now deeply Indian.
[Amit Varma]: I had a fascinating conversation with him on this subject, but before we cut to that,
[Amit Varma]: here's a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls? Well, worry no more. Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India, and adapts them into objects of everyday use. These include wearable
[Amit Varma]: art like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and table runners, and accessories
[Amit Varma]: like tote bags. This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at
[Amit Varma]: an accessible price, and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do. What's more,
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products, including fridge magnets with
[Amit Varma]: some stunning motifs, and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood. Their artists
[Amit Varma]: include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vazvo x Vazvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip Sharma, Shruti
[Amit Varma]: Nelson and Pradeep Mishra. They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting.
[Amit Varma]: But even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an OU. And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20. That's
[Amit Varma]: IVM for IVM podcast. IVM20 for a 20% discount at IndianColors.com. Vikram, welcome to the
[Guest]: scene in the NC. Thank you for having me. It's really great to be back in this podcasting
[Amit Varma]: space after almost two years, at which point I will urge my listeners to head on over to
[Amit Varma]: audiomatic.in and listen to the Real Food Podcast by Vikram Doctor. How many episodes
[Guest]: of that did you do? I think we managed about 48 or so. Wow. So you're beat us. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: you're how many episodes already? Mine is, this will be episode 95. Mine is much easier.
[Amit Varma]: You just sit down and you record a conversation. Yours included tons of research and was meticulously
[Guest]: produced and so on. We had a lot of people interviews from outside etc, which added to
[Amit Varma]: the interest but also made it much harder to do. So what I'd like to do for all of my
[Amit Varma]: listeners who may not know who you are, the few of them, as it might be, is kind of talk
[Amit Varma]: about how you got into writing about food in particular. You're obviously a very accomplished
[Amit Varma]: journalist. You work as a consulting editor at the Economic Times. But what I've always
[Amit Varma]: known you for is for being an incredible food writer. I often tell my friends and I don't
[Amit Varma]: want to embarrass you by saying this, but I often tell people you're the best food writer
[Amit Varma]: in the world because the kind of depth of insights you have not just about food, but
[Amit Varma]: the connections you make with food, to politics, to geography, to culture, to everything just
[Amit Varma]: blows my mind. How did you get interested in food? Well, I mean, when I started off
[Guest]: as a journalist, like a lot of young journalists, you know, all young journalists are made to
[Guest]: do a few routine things, you're always meant to do a few film reviews, you're meant to
[Guest]: do a few book reviews, and you're meant to do a few restaurant reviews. So I started
[Guest]: off doing restaurant reviews for I think it was Business India at that time. And, you
[Guest]: know, very quickly, I got very bored of doing restaurant reviews, because I don't know
[Guest]: if you agree with me, but I find the restaurant scene in Bombay is pretty sad. And for a basic
[Guest]: economic reason, I mean, the rents in Bombay are so high, the overheads for restaurants
[Guest]: are so high, that it pretty much kills off any interesting restaurant, you know, all
[Guest]: restaurants to make money have to become a sort of mean level food that they produce
[Guest]: really interesting niche restaurants. It's happening now, to some extent, but like 20
[Guest]: years back, it was pretty rare. And this is early 90s. Yeah, it was mid 90s. And, you
[Guest]: know, around that time, I mean, and I quickly ran through all the interesting niche restaurants
[Guest]: in Bombay. And I got really bored. And also beyond the point, I started appreciating what
[Guest]: goes into producing restaurants, and the amount of effort that people, you know, put into
[Guest]: running restaurants is crazy. And I started feeling guilty beyond the point of just coming
[Guest]: and having one meal and writing some stupid review about that. I mean, I'm not saying
[Guest]: all the restaurants were good. Many of them were completely crappy. But even a crappy
[Guest]: restaurant, unfortunately, requires a lot of work. So I just got bored about writing
[Guest]: about restaurants. But I did discover something interesting that I could talk to anyone about
[Guest]: food. And you could strike up a conversation. It's very, very rare that you find someone
[Guest]: who is not interested with food. And also, what was interesting about food was that you
[Guest]: could talk to people who people don't normally talk to. So for instance, women, a lot of
[Guest]: older women, you know, people who work behind the scenes, everybody's interested in food,
[Guest]: everybody has food stories. Everybody has food memories. It became a great way to learn
[Amit Varma]: about people and different aspects of India. And were you interested in food in a general
[Amit Varma]: way from before this? Because you know, the depth of knowledge that you show in your columns,
[Amit Varma]: for example, when you go to the origins of different kinds of food, and you're practically
[Amit Varma]: going back hundreds of years and drawing all these intricate narratives? How do you gain
[Amit Varma]: that knowledge? I mean, part of it, of course, comes from talking to people, like you said,
[Guest]: part of it comes from talking to people, but also a lot of it comes from just reading material.
[Guest]: I was always interested in history. And especially, you know, different sources of history,
[Guest]: like personal memoirs, newspaper accounts, you know, these sources of history that often get
[Guest]: overlooked. And I found that there was a wealth of material in that, which people were just not
[Guest]: looking at. There were all sorts of unusual sources of information, you know, for instance,
[Guest]: especially when it comes to food. One of the things people don't understand about the government,
[Guest]: especially, you know, the agricultural department, is that we have this vast network of agricultural
[Guest]: research institutes, almost any type of food of any type of agricultural issue, there's an
[Guest]: institute dedicated to that, who are doing all sorts of fascinating in depth research in these
[Guest]: areas. And you can often write to the directors of these institutes. And you'll get fascinating
[Guest]: bits of information, you know, so I started, you know, one thing I'm particularly interested in is
[Guest]: bananas, partly because I'm from South India, and I've always liked bananas. And I started becoming
[Guest]: curious about the different types of bananas I would see on the street side, especially in South
[Guest]: India, and I didn't know the names, or they had, you know, different names. And I started trying to
[Guest]: identify these bananas. And I actually wrote to the director of the National Research Center for
[Guest]: bananas in Trichy, a very nice gentleman called Dr. Mustafa at that time and sending him pictures
[Guest]: of the bananas, and he would very sweetly like, identify them and tell me a bit more about them.
[Guest]: And that's when I realized that the stories behind things are really fascinating. And it's all there,
[Amit Varma]: you know, just you just have to read about it. And I mean, just hearing about a National
[Amit Varma]: Research Center for bananas is kind of funny in itself. So you know, the way I've always sort of
[Amit Varma]: food is I kind of think of food and cuisines as a static kind of thing, that I know that, okay,
[Amit Varma]: this is Konkani cuisine, and this is Tamilian cuisine, and this is North Indian cuisine,
[Amit Varma]: and blah, blah, blah. And, and that's partly because I'm at this fixed point in time,
[Amit Varma]: and I'm looking at it from that vantage point. And the more you read, and especially you get a
[Amit Varma]: sense of this through reading your columns, that it's actually really dynamic. And a lot of what
[Amit Varma]: we think of as Indian food isn't really Indian at all. In fact, there's so much of an intermingling
[Amit Varma]: of cultures and traditions in this almost literal and metaphorical melting pot, so to say.
[Guest]: Absolutely. And, you know, I mean, I think this is true of any country, but particularly India,
[Guest]: because, you know, this was one country where so many different traditions, so many
[Guest]: trade routes would meet. I mean, you know, we were at one end of the Silk Road,
[Guest]: there's so many spices came, not just from India, but from Southeast Asia through India. So, you
[Guest]: know, that gave us all the connections towards Southeast Asia. So then you had all the different
[Guest]: waves of colonists and, you know, other people coming into India, bringing their own food
[Guest]: traditions, refugees, immigrants. There's always been this vast churn of people across India,
[Guest]: and each churn is accompanied by their own food traditions. So that's what's really fascinating.
[Guest]: There's nothing, once you start reading Indian food traditions, you realize that nothing is
[Guest]: static, that some of the things that we think are most intrinsically Indian are actually not
[Guest]: that Indian in their origin, though we have made them Indian now. And I'll give you two
[Guest]: fascinating examples. You know, we're recording this in November, the, you know, the festive
[Guest]: Diwali has just got over. And we have seen like all the religious seasons, all the rituals have
[Guest]: been happening. And you know, we've all these rituals have been accompanied by marigolds. And
[Guest]: we think of marigolds as being one of the most intrinsically Indian flowers.
[Guest]: This is Gandalful.
[Guest]: Gandalful, yeah, which you can eat, by the way. So I'm not actually,
[Guest]: if you remember in Monsoon Wedding, there was that guy who was always eating the marigolds. So
[Guest]: I'm not drifting too far away from food. Now, what people don't understand is that the marigolds that
[Guest]: we have today are actually not Indian in origin. They are Mexican marigolds. They're a type of
[Guest]: plant called tagetes, which actually there was an Indian marigold earlier, which some people still
[Guest]: grow. They're called calendulas. They both have the same bright orange color. But calendulas are
[Guest]: simpler flowers, whereas the Mexican marigolds are much more impressive looking flowers.
[Guest]: And at some point, these Mexican marigolds came to India. And we quietly shifted to growing
[Guest]: marigolds, which have always been part of Indian tradition, but just growing these Mexican
[Guest]: marigolds. So to me, it's fascinating, this Indian, all these Indian festivals are happening
[Guest]: with Mexican marigolds.
[Guest]: Right. And what about the other one?
[Guest]: The other one is actually saffron. I mean, and I don't want to get too political, but you know,
[Guest]: the way saffron is now used as an adjective for a particular type of politics. And we say saffron
[Guest]: this, saffron like, saffron activists. But saffron in itself is not Indian. Now, let me qualify that.
[Guest]: What is deeply Indian, what is deeply Hindu is that orange color. That orange color has always
[Guest]: been an intrinsically important part of Hindu rituals. And that would have come from, you know,
[Guest]: ochre in the earth or from turmeric in particular. Turmeric is deeply Indian. It's a deeply Indian
[Guest]: part of Indian rituals. But saffron is not. I mean, saffron is an interesting spice for a couple
[Guest]: of reasons. One is it's a spice from the temperate zones. We think of spices as coming from tropical
[Guest]: countries, but saffron actually comes from the crocus flower, which grows in temperate climates.
[Guest]: So it's one of the rare spices which comes from the more northern latitudes, which means that
[Guest]: there's only one part of India which is suitable for it, which is actually Kashmir. So and the
[Guest]: saffron in Kashmir is only recorded from around about the 5th or 6th century AD. So saffron in
[Guest]: itself is not deeply Indian. What seems to have happened, and unfortunately, as with a lot of food
[Guest]: stuff, a lot of it is just conjecture. We started using kesar as an indication for that orange color,
[Guest]: which was so deeply Indian, possibly because it was more expensive. It was a sort of aspirational,
[Guest]: you know, it was more aspirational than haldi. So now we use kesar as a synonym for a whole
[Guest]: type of Hinduism. But saffron is not Indian. So where did it come from? It probably came from
[Guest]: somewhere in the Middle East, from somewhere in Turkey or somewhere like that, which is an
[Guest]: area of a lot of biodiversity. What else came from there? Oh, so much. I mean, wheat, of course,
[Guest]: originally came from there, possibly a whole bunch of spices like coriander, cumin.
[Guest]: Rotis are not Indian. Well, yeah, rotis are probably not Indian. And in fact, through large
[Guest]: parts of India, they have not been part of Indian culture for very long. I mean, especially if you
[Guest]: come from South India, where I grew up, wheat, bread, rotis was simply not part of the culture.
[Guest]: I mean, there were a few communities that made wheat rotis. But it really, wheat started growing
[Guest]: in South India after the 60s for a very simple economic political reason. In the 60s, India was
[Guest]: suffering from really severe famines. And we approached the US for aid, which the US under
[Guest]: Lyndon Johnson gave us aid, but as always with Americans, it was aid on their terms, which means
[Guest]: they didn't give us money, they gave us grain, the vast amounts of wheat grown in the Midwestern
[Guest]: states. So we got wheat under the PL 480 program. But once it came to India, the government had to
[Guest]: make Indians eat it. And we weren't used to this. I mean, for one thing, it was a very different
[Guest]: type of wheat from the sort of wheat that was being eaten in North India. You have lots of
[Guest]: complaints from the era of people in North India who had to like suddenly start eating this hard
[Guest]: American wheat. And then it had to come to South India where there were no traditions at all.
[Guest]: And through a process of, you know, commercial spreading through sheer necessity through
[Guest]: government promotion, South India slowly started eating wheat. And so now it's very common in South
[Guest]: India to have bread and rotis and malabar parathas and things like that. But it's something which is
[Amit Varma]: less than 50 years old. And that's quite mind blowing to me, because of malabar paratha or the
[Amit Varma]: Kerala paratha, you think, oh, this is obviously so Indian as part of that cuisine. And you're
[Guest]: pointing out that it's not even as old as Nehru. Absolutely. I mean, a Kerala in particular,
[Guest]: and I'm saying this, because I'm half a Malayali has always been in a state where we just seen a
[Guest]: real wide amount of change of new products being introduced. And some of them are actually very
[Guest]: precisely dated, for instance, tapioca kappa, which is now seen as such a Malayali thing,
[Guest]: you can go to Malayali restaurants and you have kappa biryani and kappa and fish curry.
[Guest]: But kappa, tapioca was very consciously introduced by the king of Travancore sometime in the mid
[Guest]: 19th century, when he saw that he needed some sort of starch substitute to make up for the rice
[Guest]: deficiencies because of shortfalls in rice production. And he realized that tapioca was
[Guest]: a tropical plant that grew easily. And he very consciously introduced tapioca into Kerala.
[Guest]: And now tapioca is seen as intrinsically part of Kerala culture.
[Amit Varma]: And this was a king of Travancore. But before that, where did tapioca come from?
[Guest]: Tapioca, cassava comes from the new world from Brazil.
[Amit Varma]: Right, from South America, from South America. So just to sort of go back to that earlier thing,
[Amit Varma]: which we digress from, which is a Middle East. So what else comes from the wheat you were saying
[Guest]: comes from there, as you said, saffron, a whole range of spices, a number of fruits, lemons,
[Guest]: things like that. The Middle East is one of the great centers of biodiversity.
[Amit Varma]: And from there, not just ingredients, but we also had ways of cooking and
[Guest]: entire cuisines come from the Middle East.
[Guest]: Yes, to some extent. I mean, you know, for instance, a lot of our traditions of frying
[Guest]: and deep frying do seem to have come from the Middle East. And there are a number of reasons
[Guest]: for this. I mean, while, you know, I don't want to generalize and saying that frying was not
[Guest]: there in India earlier. It's true that frying was not common, as far as we know,
[Guest]: from the earlier sources. And there's a very simple reason for that. It's the fuel sources.
[Guest]: I mean, a lot of food and cooking is driven by what fuel is available at your disposal.
[Guest]: And in India, we did not have many fuel sources. Coal was relatively unknown in India. In fact,
[Guest]: it was completely unknown until the British era, except in very small parts of the Northeast.
[Guest]: There was wood, but then wood has always been a problem through large parts of India.
[Guest]: Our basic fuel source was cow dung. And it's one reason, among many others, that, you know,
[Guest]: cows are given this very special status in India. And if you know anything about cow dung,
[Guest]: is it burns with a very slow flame, okay? You can't get a very high heat on cow dung.
[Guest]: What it's ideal for is for boiling. So, we developed whole cuisines based essentially
[Guest]: around boiling foods and our pots also became pots that could go on cow dung fires.
[Guest]: So, there is some truth in the point that people like Michael Pollan have made that,
[Guest]: you know, Indian cuisine is essentially in its origins about boiling. But once the Muslims come
[Guest]: in, and these traditions come in, you get much many more traditions of frying. In fact, in many
[Guest]: parts of India, frying is still seen as much more of a Muslim tradition. And a lot of the utensils,
[Guest]: for instance, copper, which is ideal for frying because it conducts heat fast, is again seen as a
[Guest]: utensil as a type of metal used in the Muslim tradition. And again, we get, you know, many
[Guest]: types of food. So, one of the most intrinsic foods to India, which we think is so Indian,
[Guest]: as samosas, I mean, you know, you remember, what was the line that Lalu Prasad used?
[Amit Varma]: Jab tak samosa mein rahega, aloo Bihar mein rahega.
[Guest]: Now, what is fascinating about that is neither samosas or aloo are originally Indian. Okay,
[Guest]: potatoes come with the British, samosas come from probably the Turkish tradition,
[Guest]: where you have something called sambusak. And this idea of getting a wheat dough,
[Guest]: which is kneaded with oil, so it becomes flaky. That's a very intrinsically part of Turkic culture.
[Guest]: You see it throughout Central Asia, and down to Turkey, where you have sambusak.
[Guest]: So, samosas and potatoes are, you know, something that have come to us from outside and this
[Amit Varma]: tradition of, of cooking of deep frying things. Fantastic. And you know, one of the points you
[Amit Varma]: made to me when we were talking just before we started the recording for the show is that a lot
[Amit Varma]: of Indian cooking has adapted itself by pragmatism. And therefore, a lot of foreign
[Amit Varma]: elements get easily adapted, because they just happen to be more suited. Can you elaborate?
[Guest]: Yeah, see, I mean, this is a point, I think, a very pragmatic point that I often emphasize that,
[Guest]: you know, when it comes to cooking, we often forget who is actually doing the cooking.
[Guest]: And the truth of Indian cooking is that vast amounts of Indian cooking depends on the
[Guest]: unacknowledged labor of two types of people, servants and daughters-in-law,
[Guest]: who are treated as servants, essentially. And this labor, you know, this unacknowledged labor
[Guest]: is what really goes into creating food, Indian food, and it's their labor, which would do all
[Guest]: this really boring, messy, tedious stuff that went into a lot of traditional cooking.
[Guest]: And nobody wants to do this sort of work. So, as you know, more people became empowered,
[Guest]: as it became harder to force, you know, your daughters-in-law to work as like,
[Guest]: essentially slave labor, people stopped wanting to do this traditional food. So,
[Guest]: I'll give you one example. One type of food that is very essentially Indian, in fact,
[Guest]: is banana flowers. Okay. Mochar, as you know them in Bengal, and it was there right through
[Guest]: southern India, through Bengal. In fact, if you can go to books like the Supershastra,
[Guest]: which is from something I'm forgetting that actually dates, but from Karnataka, it's an amazing
[Guest]: book. It's a cookbook, which half the recipes are using banana flower in different ways. And,
[Guest]: you know, when you look at this at the recipes, they're fascinating recipes from historical
[Guest]: perspective. But I just keep thinking of all the people who had to clean the banana flowers.
[Guest]: And if you've ever cleaned banana flowers, you will know it's a tedious job, because you have
[Guest]: to oil your hands, because there's a sort of sticky substance that's in the banana flowers.
[Guest]: And then each petal, you know, each sort of proto banana has this sort of undigestible part,
[Guest]: which has to be cleaned off by hand. It's a real pain. You've cleaned it. I've tried doing it,
[Guest]: and it's a real pain. I mean, the results are delicious. I love mochar. I love the banana
[Guest]: flower recipes once they finally cook, but God knows it's not something I want to do every day.
[Guest]: And so, at some point, when these English vegetables, as they're called foreign vegetables
[Guest]: started coming in from different sources, people stopped cooking banana flower. And they start
[Guest]: cook to these sort of Western vegetables, or not Western, just from outside India,
[Guest]: non-Indian vegetables, which were just much easier to cook. Cabbage, for instance, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, you can cook red cabbage in particular, so that it tastes a lot like banana flower.
[Guest]: And it's so much easier to cook. You just chop it up. I mean, cabbage is not Indian,
[Guest]: it's a very deeply European vegetable. But I often think Indians cook cabbage in really
[Guest]: wonderful ways. It's just that because we don't value cabbage, we don't value all the Indian
[Guest]: dishes that use cabbage. So, we started cooking all these vegetables. And these sort of traditional
[Guest]: Indian vegetables got largely forgotten. I mean, the interesting irony is that these
[Guest]: vegetables are now being rediscovered, not in India, but abroad, because the huge growth of
[Guest]: the vegan movement abroad is actually finding all these traditional Indian ingredients very useful,
[Guest]: because so much of Indian food is actually very easily adaptable to vegan food, especially from
[Guest]: South India, where you have coconut milk, instead of cow's milk or buffalo's milk,
[Guest]: then it's all essentially vegan food. So, you can go to New York, and you can have these really
[Guest]: fancy hipster restaurants, which will serve you burgers made out of banana flower, or green jack
[Guest]: fruit, another very intrinsically Indian vegetable. Whereas it's almost impossible to get these dishes
[Amit Varma]: in India now, for good reason. And you know, a few episodes back, I did an episode of the
[Amit Varma]: scene in the unseen called metrics of empowerment, where I sat down with three economists, Devika
[Amit Varma]: Kher, Nidhi Gupta, and Hamsini Hariharan, and we were trying to figure out some sort of out of the
[Amit Varma]: box metrics, which showed that women have been empowered. And you know, the image that you
[Amit Varma]: painted of a male patriarch ordering ki, you know, give me mochad dalna and somebody has to and then
[Amit Varma]: the daughter in law has to clean the banana flower. And but gradually over the ages, as those daughters
[Amit Varma]: in law become more empowered and can put their foot down, they choose to make cabbage instead.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, one offbeat metric of empowerment is a move away from banana flower to cabbage.
[Guest]: Oh, actually, you know, one of the best examples is something that has happened,
[Guest]: maybe if not in our generation, but in our parents generation,
[Guest]: which is the great shift to stainless steel. I mean, I don't know if you remember this,
[Guest]: but I do remember like, you know, these these women would come to the houses with these with
[Guest]: these stainless steel vessels, they were these sort of nomadic women. And they would ask the
[Guest]: women if they had like old saris, which had zari in them. And it was amazing, like how many women
[Guest]: would empty out their chest full of saris and exchange them for these stainless steel vessels.
[Guest]: And in a matter of about a decade, stainless steel, which was a very niche product, it was,
[Guest]: you know, originally used for making armaments. Stainless steel became ubiquitous in Indian
[Guest]: kitchens for us today, many of us when we think of traditional Indian kitchens,
[Guest]: we think of stainless steel, all that bright silver, ever silver, it was called
[Guest]: stainless steel vessels, and you know, shops full of stainless steel vessels. But this happened in
[Guest]: a matter of 10 years. And why did it happen? It's not even that stainless steel is a particularly
[Guest]: good medium for cooking, it's actually not a particularly good medium, because it doesn't
[Guest]: conduct heat very well. Things like brass and copper are actually much better conductors of
[Guest]: heat. But stainless steel is easy to clean. And if you've ever been through the trouble of
[Guest]: cleaning brass vessels, you know what a pain it is. I mean, to clean brass vessels properly,
[Guest]: you need something acidic. So you had these sort of, you know, solutions of tamarind, we had to
[Guest]: steep and then you had to clean it. And then once or twice every year, you had to get the kalaiwala
[Guest]: to come. I don't know if you've ever seen that the guys would come and make little fires outside
[Guest]: your house and put the tin lining inside. Taking care of brass vessels is a real pain, they're also
[Guest]: like really heavy. So within 10 years, women in the kitchen, very happily gave up all their
[Guest]: traditional brass vessels for stainless steel. And that's actually a marvellous heading for the
[Amit Varma]: journey that the Indian woman has taken from saris to stainless steel, absolutely beautiful
[Amit Varma]: alliterations. We'll take a quick commercial break here. And we'll talk more about Indian
[Amit Varma]: food and how it is not as Indian as you think, though I would hold that all food is Indian once
[Unknown]: you eat it after this break. Hello, everybody, welcome to another week on the IBM podcast
[Unknown]: network. If you're not following us on social media, please make sure that you are we are
[Unknown]: IBM podcasts on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram. I have a little bit of news for people we are
[Unknown]: releasing a new version of our app. And as part of that we're running a beta program,
[Unknown]: we have about 40 slots left for different users to participate in the beta program. And if you'd
[Unknown]: be interested in doing that, please go to our website ibmpodcast.com slash app beta. That's
[Unknown]: ibmpodcast.com slash app beta. Over there, you'll be finding this form which will let you submit
[Unknown]: your email address to us and we'll invite you into the beta. Again, it's a limited availability. So
[Unknown]: we're only going to be able to invite so many people. But if you're interested, please do
[Unknown]: subscribe. And this week on Cyrus says Cyrus talks to stand up comedian Saurabh Mehta about
[Unknown]: moving from HR to comedy and positioning himself as a first gen stand up comic. On Simplified this
[Unknown]: week, the guys talk to Atul Churramani of Magna Sound about the golden age of indie pop in the
[Unknown]: 90s. On the season finale of the kinetic living podcast coach only spoke to fellow NTC trainer
[Unknown]: Kunal Rajput and they talk about kettlebell sports powerlifting and how his dad a Mumbai based
[Unknown]: bodybuilder inspired him to pursue his fitness career. And starting November 19. We have a very
[Unknown]: exciting project. We're starting our first history project with Anirudh Kandisetty. It's called
[Unknown]: Echoes of India. Please do catch it on the IBM podcast app website or wherever you get your
[Unknown]: podcast from. And with that, let's continue on with your show. Welcome back to the scene in the
[Amit Varma]: unseen. I'm chatting with Vikram doctor about Indian food and what makes it Indian and where
[Amit Varma]: it actually came from. So Vikram, tell me a little bit more about the different streams of influences
[Amit Varma]: where they came from, like, obviously, there are trade routes as a silk route, which ended here,
[Amit Varma]: as you said, there was, you know, the route from the Middle East, I presume, a lot of the influences
[Amit Varma]: that would have come with the Islamic invasions, and there were the different kind of colonialism,
[Guest]: there were the various, you know, colonial routes of ingredients to India. But there are also routes
[Guest]: that people are less aware of. For instance, we are so conditioned to thinking of products coming
[Guest]: in from the west, that we often ignore all the influences coming from the east. And actually,
[Guest]: especially from South India, especially in Bengal, there are massive traditions of influences from
[Guest]: Southeast Asia, you know, intrinsically Southeast Asian, or Far Eastern, and also from the Americas,
[Guest]: because we, you know, again, because of this Western focus we have, we forget that there was
[Guest]: this huge movement of goods from the New World from South America, over the Pacific by what I
[Guest]: call the Manila galleons. The Manila galleons were these fleets of ships that set off from
[Guest]: Peru, from Mexico to Manila, this is Spanish, because the Philippines was Spanish run. And
[Guest]: arguably, a vast amount of food products came to Asia, over the Pacific through the Manila galleons,
[Guest]: and spread from there to India. I mean, again, we're hypothesizing which products these were,
[Guest]: but quite probably included pineapples, it could have been cashews, it could have been
[Guest]: sweet potatoes, which are actually very interesting product, because you may even
[Guest]: have predated the Manila galleons, and come with the Polynesian, you know, movement across the
[Guest]: Pacific. And the one that's really interesting is chilies, because we are still not very sure
[Guest]: how chilies came to India. And of course, how they became such an intrinsically part of
[Guest]: Indian society. Of course, chilies are from South America. That's the one thing we know for sure.
[Guest]: But how did chilies become so essentially Indian and, again, we can only speculate, I mean,
[Guest]: perhaps the best, the most interesting theory was the one put forth by K.T. Acharya, India's pioneering
[Guest]: food historian, whose idea was that chilies substituted a particular spice, which is now
[Guest]: very rare here, which is called long pepper. Long pepper is something called pipali. And if you've
[Guest]: ever had a really bad cough, you know, your mother might have given you this as a sort of Ayurvedic
[Guest]: preparation in hot milk. It's a variety of pepper, which is long, as the name suggests. And it looks
[Guest]: a bit like a chili. It's much more spicy, much more peppery. And Acharya's theory is that this was
[Guest]: used a lot along with regular black pepper. But the thing about long pepper is that it's not a
[Guest]: very convenient spice. I mean, A, it grows only where pepper vines grow, which is really the very
[Guest]: much more tropical, you know, rainforest parts of India. It doesn't keep very well. I mean,
[Guest]: you have to pickle it and it's not that as convenient to use. And when chilies came,
[Guest]: chilies are a very easy crop to grow. They grow almost anywhere. People grow chilies in pots in
[Guest]: their house. And you can always have chilies growing and it's a very easy source of heat.
[Guest]: So Acharya's theory and it fits in a way from a lot of what we're talking like what we started
[Guest]: off by saying about the marigolds. We just found chilies to be a much more easier way of getting
[Guest]: heat into our food than long pepper. And this again goes back to what you were saying about
[Amit Varma]: pragmatism. Yeah. And it seems to me that therefore a lot of our adopting foreign foods
[Amit Varma]: is as much an adoption of food itself as an adoption of technology. In the sense that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you want that spiciness in your food instead of the old technology, which is long
[Amit Varma]: peppers, you adopt a new technology, which is chilies, which are coming from outside and who
[Amit Varma]: cares where they're coming from? I mean, you adopt them and you make them quintessentially Indian.
[Guest]: Yeah. So, you know, the basics of Indian food remain the same. It's just that the means that
[Guest]: we used to get it become slightly different. Another fascinating example is with dals.
[Guest]: Now, dal is something that, again, that is very basic and intrinsic to Indian food,
[Guest]: mainly because it's one of our main sources of protein. And we depend upon legumes on beans
[Guest]: a lot more than most other parts of the world. And we have very traditional dals like moong and
[Guest]: masoor and urad dal and also lesser known dals, which we started substituting once we encountered
[Guest]: the New World dals. Now, this whole process of exchange between these dals you named are Indian.
[Guest]: The dals are named Indian. What is not Indian is rajma, for instance. And this is really
[Guest]: interesting when you think about it, because, you know, you think of rajma chawal as being
[Guest]: this essential North Indian dish, but rajma is not. Rajma is a New World bean. And this process,
[Guest]: which is called the Colombian exchange of old and New World products being exchanged. Rajma is one
[Guest]: of the key products that was exchanged. And you can even see it in the name because the hypothesis
[Guest]: is that I named three dals earlier, moong, masoor and urad, which is called mash. And the theory is
[Guest]: that rajma means the king, the large urad, large mash. Okay. And it came to India. It just fitted
[Guest]: into Indian cooking styles. And now it's an intrinsically part of India as rajma chawal.
[Amit Varma]: That's mind blowing. And what you pointed out earlier before we started talking was,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, on one hand, you were talking about how idlis are taking over India, which I'll ask you
[Amit Varma]: to elaborate on. But when I asked you if idlis are Indian, you said that maybe not that there
[Guest]: is a theory that fermentation came from Indonesia. Yeah, I mean, you know, again, as with a lot of
[Guest]: food history, so much is speculation. But it's true that Indonesia is a sort of center point
[Guest]: for lots of fascinating fermented foods, like tempeh, and a whole range of other fermented
[Guest]: foods. And one theory is that idli, which is actually a fermented food, is something that
[Guest]: came from Indonesia through the long Tamil connection with Southeast Asia. And what is
[Guest]: fascinating, I mean, earlier, I'd spoken about the wheat invasion of South India. But to me,
[Guest]: what has been equally fascinating the last few decades has been the idli invasion of North India,
[Guest]: because it's happened for a very simple reason. I mean, when I was growing up,
[Guest]: idlis were seen as madrasi, it was this very South Indian thing, you know, I had friends,
[Guest]: you know, family friends would come from the north, and they would want to eat like
[Guest]: idlis, you know, because it was intrinsically like, Indian. And it was not that usual to get
[Guest]: idlis outside South India. Now, you can go across India, and you will find idlis everywhere,
[Guest]: particularly in roadside dhabas. I mean, roadside dhabas have this sort of impression of being very
[Guest]: North Indian Punjabi, but actually what you can get in them across India is idlis, because they're
[Guest]: seen as light, safe, easy to eat. And this is the key thing, easy to produce in bulk.
[Guest]: One thing that has really empowered idlis to spread across India is that it's the one food
[Guest]: which is easy to make on a large scale, once especially once wet grinders were invented.
[Guest]: We still don't know who invented wet grinders, but it seems likely that wet grinders were invented
[Guest]: somewhere in around Coimbatore, because it has a whole machine parts industry and somebody,
[Guest]: some bright person decided to fit a sort of grinder to the stone inside the stone and you
[Guest]: got wet grinders. And slowly wet grinders started picking up. And restaurants realized that they
[Guest]: could use wet grinders to make the idli batter very easily. And then it was just a question of
[Guest]: steaming them on a large scale. Now compare that to chapatis. Chapatis are strangely enough, one
[Guest]: typically Indian food, which we have not been able to scale up. I mean, yes, there are chapati
[Guest]: makers, but everybody hates the rotis that come from chapati makers. Some daughters-in-law are
[Guest]: called chapati makers. And you know, this is the problem with chapatis. Chapatis have to be made
[Guest]: one at a time by hand. And people have all sorts of preferences. You know, people don't, some people
[Guest]: like it more puffed, some people like it slightly burnt, some people like it really soft. It's
[Guest]: really difficult to scale up chapatis. Whereas it's very easy to scale up idlis. And for that
[Guest]: reason alone, idlis have become, I would say, our national food in a way that chapatis no longer are.
[Amit Varma]: That's quite mind blowing, especially from someone who's grown up eating Bengali and
[Amit Varma]: North Indian food to hear you describe of idlis as, and the way you spoke of it, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a venture capitalist would love that. What should I invest in? Idlis scale better. And they're also,
[Amit Varma]: again, a metric of empowerment, because chapatis are labor intensive. The labor in Indian kitchens
[Guest]: is usually done by unpaid women. So hey, in fact, there is one startup, which has become hugely
[Guest]: successful ID, by simply making Italy batter, which can be, you know, sold through chilled
[Guest]: cabinets. And it's become hugely successful. Now, I can go to like any kirana shop in Bombay,
[Guest]: and actually through most parts of most large cities in India and buy ready made Italy batter,
[Guest]: which then I just have to put into a pressure cooker and steam it. So much for my keto diet.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not craving idlis. So far, during this conversation, you've spoken of things like
[Amit Varma]: saffron, marigold, chilies, tomatoes, potatoes, beans, rajma, all of which come from outside,
[Amit Varma]: what is there, which is quintessentially Indian? Like, for example, if 2000 years ago, I had to
[Amit Varma]: have what would then be called an Indian meal? What would it consist of? I realize it's a very
[Amit Varma]: simplistic question, because there's so many different regions and so on. But you know,
[Guest]: well, obviously, rice, I mean, most Indian foods were based around rice, and a few other products.
[Guest]: I mean, bananas, for example, we tend to forget how important bananas have been, because we just
[Guest]: think of bananas in terms of the ripe fruit, but actually green bananas are cooked as a vegetable,
[Guest]: a very intrinsically Indian preparation, a lot of ritual foods involve green bananas. And
[Guest]: that the text I was mentioning to you earlier, the super shastra, along with banana flowers,
[Guest]: green bananas are one of the vegetables that they use a lot. And bananas, again,
[Guest]: may or may not have originated in India. But certainly, in India is one of the largest
[Guest]: sources of diversity for bananas. And bananas have gone from India across the world.
[Amit Varma]: But what is really strange... We are a banana republic in that sense.
[Guest]: We are a banana republic, we are better than a banana republic, because we have this huge
[Guest]: diversity of bananas. Okay, whereas the banana republics, which you're talking about are the
[Guest]: Central American countries that started growing bananas for the American market. And these
[Guest]: countries were growing bananas purely for commercial reasons. The bananas were not
[Guest]: native to these countries, they were vast banana plantations. And the companies like Dole,
[Guest]: and what is now Chiquita Bananas, which invested in these republics and essentially became so
[Guest]: powerful that they control these republics, which is why they call banana republics,
[Guest]: only grew one or two types of bananas. That's what they were interested in, because they were
[Guest]: industrially grown bananas. Now, I am making a point on this, which we will come to,
[Guest]: but because bananas are something I'm very passionate about. They hit upon only two or
[Guest]: three types of bananas. And the problem with monocultures, if you know anything about
[Guest]: agriculture, is that monocultures are very dangerous, because you get a virus, which
[Guest]: kills them, you kill all of them. And that's exactly what has happened with bananas, not once,
[Guest]: but twice, that a virus comes, which wipes out a strain of banana completely. And this has been
[Guest]: happening across the world. So when the original type of banana got wiped out, the banana companies
[Guest]: quickly innovated and found a new type, which is called Cavendish, which has now become the
[Guest]: universal banana. If you go across to the West, there is only one type of banana that you know,
[Guest]: which is long, beautifully yellow, and completely tasteless. But it's great for the grocery trade.
[Guest]: That's what you know, it's a Cavendish is a banana, which is an industrial banana.
[Guest]: Why do people eat it if it's tasteless?
[Guest]: Because that's all they know. Americans, people in the West don't know any other type of banana.
[Guest]: You if they come to India, their minds get blown when they eat the sort of banana,
[Guest]: the varieties of bananas that we have over here. But for them, there's only one type of banana.
[Guest]: It looks beautiful. It's perfectly yellow. And that's what they see as a banana. Now,
[Guest]: what has happened is that two or three types of virus are wiping out this,
[Guest]: exactly as happened in the past is repeating. The bananas are being Cavendish is being wiped out
[Guest]: across the Central American states across the banana, the so called banana republics.
[Guest]: So what is happening now is that they're coming to India, and they're growing Cavendish over here,
[Guest]: which is one of the stupidest things possible, because a it's completely tasteless compared to
[Guest]: our, you know, native bananas, and be it's going to happen here, the virus will come here,
[Guest]: the virus has already started coming out here. But what is awful is because they are growing
[Guest]: these bananas, and it's been planted in in vast amounts in Maharashtra and Gujarat in particular,
[Guest]: for the Western market, and the surplus is being dumped in the Indian market. So in the last 10
[Guest]: years, 10 years back, I could go to Matunga and Bombay, and I would get five or six types of
[Guest]: bananas from South India, some of them grown in in Versailles. Today, everywhere you get you get
[Guest]: what is called golden banana, which is Cavendish. And it's a disaster. It's tasteless. It's not a
[Guest]: patch on the traditional Indian bananas, like, you know, Rastalis, or all the South Indian bananas.
[Guest]: But it's what we've started growing. And it is really a tragedy.
[Amit Varma]: And there are many cautionary tales in this one of them, of course, is of the value of diversity,
[Amit Varma]: because we have such a diverse types of bananas, you won't have this kind of thing happening where
[Amit Varma]: a virus cleans it out. And you know, the other is of perhaps a cautionary tale about a certain
[Amit Varma]: kind of globalization, which, you know, wipes out indigenous forms of, in this particular context,
[Amit Varma]: it's banana, but it could be anything, you know, you can extend it to culture and food and whatever.
[Guest]: And, and it's a tragedy of education, you know, because we don't value Indian bananas
[Guest]: in themselves, we have forgotten how good they taste. I mean, I can still go to Tamil Nadu,
[Guest]: luckily, where the you know, Cavendish was not taken over the extent to it as in Bombay or North
[Guest]: India. And you have these amazing bananas, you have a variety of bananas, you know, in a big,
[Guest]: thick slice, some of them slightly chewy, they have the red bananas. And it's a real tragedy
[Guest]: that they're all being wiped out and replaced by this one tasteless banana, which is perfect for
[Guest]: the international trade, which itself is going to get wiped out in time by the virus.
[Amit Varma]: So there's an irony in this that we gave banana to the world, and then they gave a particular
[Guest]: kind of banana to us, which might wipe us out. Absolutely. It's in fact, a similar irony to
[Amit Varma]: our giving chicken to the world and then being assailed with chicken tikka masala.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, this is actually an interesting story, too, because
[Guest]: chickens sort of originated in India. Chickens, the modern chicken is a descendant of the Indian
[Guest]: jungle fowl, which is native to North India and Northeast India. And it does seem to have
[Guest]: been hunted in the past as a sort of game bird. But the domestication of chickens may have happened
[Guest]: somewhere in Northeast India or Southeast Asia. There are different theories about why chickens
[Guest]: in particular were domesticated. For instance, one theory is that actually chickens were
[Guest]: domesticated not for the chickens themselves, but for cockfighting, because cockfighting is part of
[Guest]: various rituals, even today, and this is controversial, but for some South Indian
[Guest]: festivals, cockfights are seen as traditional and this is being opposed by animal rights activists
[Guest]: very rightly. But so one theory is that chickens were domesticated for cockfighting rituals.
[Guest]: The other theory is that chickens were domesticated because unlike, say, ducks,
[Guest]: they don't require water. They adapt quite well to chicken coops and houses. I mean,
[Guest]: there are different theories, but the key point is that the main domestication happened
[Guest]: through Southeast Asia, from where then they spread across to the West and the rest of the world.
[Guest]: What happened then is that in around World War Two, there was a huge demand for meat,
[Guest]: especially in America. And the main meat sources, which was beef, was being sent to the battlefields
[Guest]: for all the soldiers. So the people at home had to look for another easy source of meat and chickens
[Guest]: became adopted as a quick, easy source of meat because, you know, you can raise chickens much
[Guest]: faster. That's when chicken, it's as late as that. I mean, there are certain routes before that,
[Guest]: but the mass production of chickens really happened during World War Two and post-World
[Guest]: War Two. That's when the broilers were developed because, you know, the Americans were selling
[Guest]: this idea of a world where, you know, of this vast, prosperous America where everybody always
[Guest]: had meat and chickens, broiler chickens, were seen as the meat of the future. So that's when
[Guest]: broiler chickens were developed. This completely unnatural bird, which matures in just a matter
[Guest]: of a few weeks and lives in these, you know, cooped up conditions and develops these huge,
[Guest]: heavy breast meat. You know, typically, originally chickens didn't have this heavy chicken breast
[Guest]: meat. I mean, this comes with chickens which are bred for like sitting in cooped up conditions.
[Guest]: And broilers developed from there through a lot of other American innovations, for instance,
[Guest]: the spread of antibiotics, because the problem with raising chickens in these cooped up conditions
[Guest]: is that they get diseases and they all fall sick. And coincidentally enough, the 1950s were
[Guest]: when America was discovering all the wonders of antibiotics. And they realized that putting
[Guest]: antibiotics into chicken feed makes chickens grow much faster. And that's where this completely
[Guest]: unnatural bird, which has nothing now in connection really to the Indian jungle fowl, was developed.
[Guest]: And now we have taken it into India because we have a vast population which wants meat. And
[Guest]: chicken is the easiest meat because it can be produced fast. It doesn't have any of the
[Guest]: religious and cultural hassles of pork or beef. So we are developing this vast chicken industry.
[Guest]: So there's a massive irony here that chickens which originate in India are now becoming the
[Guest]: mass Indian meat. But it's a horrible meat. It's a horrible unhealthy meat, which has no
[Amit Varma]: connection at all to the Indian jungle fowl. So in a sense, chickens have traveled the same
[Amit Varma]: distance with bananas. The modern chicken is like the Cavendish banana or the golden banana
[Guest]: and it's tasteless and it's come from the West. It's come from the way we gave them the original
[Guest]: thing. And it is this completely I mean, you know, once you read the research that's going
[Guest]: into the problems of antibiotic use and in chicken feed, and this is spilling over into humans,
[Guest]: because antibiotic resistance is rising because of this vast lavish use of antibiotics in animal
[Guest]: feed among other reasons. So it's deeply disturbing to see this this huge upsurge in chicken production
[Amit Varma]: in India. So within our culture, how do we keep our sense of what is Indian food? For example,
[Amit Varma]: you might say that bananas and chickens are Indian, but as you just, you know, pointed out,
[Amit Varma]: what a lot of people who might now go to Matunga and buy golden bananas think of as Indian isn't
[Amit Varma]: really Indian. How do we preserve our sense of what is Indian food regardless of where it
[Guest]: originated from? I mean, I think we just need to look at authenticity in buying food. I mean,
[Guest]: you know, authenticity is a problematic concept, because then, you know, people get into things of
[Guest]: like, you know, disputes or whatever is, you know, really authentic, etc. I think we should just look
[Guest]: at authenticity in terms of produced in the simplest possible way, you know, trying to buy it
[Guest]: as close to the producers as possible. One of the really encouraging things that's happening across
[Guest]: India is that we are seeing a lot of farmers, farmers markets, people, you know, producers
[Guest]: selling food directly to consumers. And that's really important. I mean, supermarkets do have
[Guest]: a role to play in the wider business sense, but the level to which supermarkets have grown in the
[Guest]: West, and in the developed world, to the extent to which they control both consumers and producers
[Amit Varma]: is a deeply disturbing. And you could argue that the impetus behind that is the same impetus
[Amit Varma]: behind this wonderful exchange of cultures, which is pragmatism. Yeah, absolutely. Look,
[Guest]: supermarkets have many benefits. Okay, I'm not going to argue with somebody who's at the end of
[Guest]: a busy day, doesn't find the time to go to a farmer's market, and actually, you know, get the
[Guest]: produce and clean themselves. It's true, we need convenience, we need, you know, to be able to make
[Guest]: things easily. It's just that we need to look at the larger costs involved. And sometimes the costs
[Guest]: involved with supermarkets and are not visible to us, but are very real, and deeply problematic,
[Guest]: like, for instance, the cost of health issues that are coming from, you know, antibiotic fed
[Amit Varma]: chickens. Is it then fair to say that while, say, the history of Indian food or the history of
[Amit Varma]: Indian cuisine has been a journey where we take influences from everywhere, whether for pragmatic
[Amit Varma]: reasons or otherwise, and, and it all becomes Indian once it's adopted. So it's not fair to say,
[Amit Varma]: for example, that chilies or tomatoes or rajma aren't Indian once we've adopted them and made
[Amit Varma]: them our own, they are Indian. But now we've come to this place where we are taking a journey almost
[Amit Varma]: in the opposite direction, we're driven by the same pragmatism as before, we are now, you know,
[Amit Varma]: changing these food habits and adopting, for example, Cavendish bananas, and what you call
[Amit Varma]: antibiotic fed modern chickens, and moving away from what can and cannot be described as our roots.
[Guest]: Right. I just think, as I said, people need to be a bit more mindful about the food. And
[Guest]: what what makes it a lot easier is that a lot of these foods are still available in India.
[Guest]: You know, many of these foods, which, you know, have been taken up by the West as these
[Guest]: fantastic modern ingredients are actually available in India. They're available in two
[Guest]: sources. One, they're available as part of rituals, a lot of traditional Indian foods survive as part
[Guest]: of of temple rituals. So for instance, during this whole thing, during upvas that we don't eat
[Guest]: grains, I mean, it's an interesting practice, because what essentially is happening is upvas
[Guest]: upvas foods go back to the traditional Indian foods, you know, the Indian foods of the field
[Guest]: of the jungle. I mean, that's the sort of idea that you would eat the food that the rishis would
[Guest]: eat. Now, again, a lot of food that is actually eaten during upvas is like things like sweet
[Guest]: potatoes, which are not intrinsically Indian. But at least it's a way of giving you a diversity,
[Guest]: you know, for upvas, you will not eat rice or wheat or something like that you'll eat millets.
[Guest]: Okay, and many millets like ragi are very intrinsically Indian. And so simply because of these
[Guest]: upvas rituals for temple purposes, a lot of foods are preserved and are available in India. One of
[Guest]: the biggest struggles in the West has been just making these foods available. Actually, in India,
[Guest]: most of these foods available, you just have to go to a traditional market, you have to ask
[Guest]: grandmothers, because many of the upvas rituals are kept up by grandmothers, and they know where
[Amit Varma]: to get all these foods. But is that going to change with time with the decline of the joint family?
[Guest]: And you know, it might, it absolutely might. But what is great is that people for health benefits
[Guest]: are rediscovering the values of all these foods. And the other way that all these foods are
[Guest]: available is actually with poor people. Because the many of these traditional foods because they
[Guest]: look down on are seen as food only for poor people. And yet they're available in a city
[Guest]: like Bombay. And it's quite fascinating. I often you know, sometimes when I go to markets,
[Guest]: I don't go into the main market, because the main market is where all the sort of prestige
[Guest]: vegetables, what you call English vegetables are sold. But if you look on the margins of markets,
[Guest]: you will find old lady sitting, they'll have a bed sheet, a piece of cloth, and they'll have
[Guest]: some bunches of greens of, you know, which they have picked, it could be like drumstick leaves,
[Guest]: it could be things like Malabar spinach, it could be like, there's a whole range of pumpkin flowers,
[Guest]: a whole range of, of forage greens, which are just available for anybody who goes out and picks them.
[Guest]: And these are available very cheap. And they're sold for people who know them, who know their
[Guest]: value, they're often extremely healthy, because they have all sorts of nutrients, which are not
[Guest]: necessarily available in the in the sort of prestigious vegetables. But they're there for
[Guest]: poor people. I mean, for instance, like, one type of green I found being sold in the mill areas,
[Guest]: actually safflower, kardi, safflower leaves, okay, not the oil, which is what are pressed and used
[Guest]: for, you know, safflower oil, but the greens of safflower. Now, this is a very traditional
[Guest]: vegetable in interior Maharashtra, which is where a lot of the mill workers come from. And it's
[Guest]: still sold in Bombay in these areas. It's a delicious green, but I can only buy it on the
[Guest]: roadside. I will never find it in a market, even on a supermarket. So if I may take this opportunity,
[Amit Varma]: you know, for listeners of my show who like to cook, why don't you recommend four or five
[Amit Varma]: interesting offbeat things which they won't find in supermarkets, which you'd recommend them to try?
[Guest]: Um, well, drumstick leaves, I mean, you know, if you want a plant that is very deeply Indian,
[Guest]: it's drumstick, sanskari plant, sanskari plant, absolutely. And drumstick are a wonderful plant,
[Guest]: because it's a tree for one thing, which means that it produces through the year,
[Guest]: the drumsticks, which are what we're familiar with is water going to like sambar and
[Guest]: daal and dishes like that. But the leaves also extremely nutritious. I mean, it's actually
[Guest]: fascinating. In Africa, there are whole, you know, NGOs that are devoted to like selling the benefits
[Guest]: of Moringa, as it's called. And you get all these projects to grow Moringa within cities. I've seen
[Guest]: projects where, you know, schoolchildren are encouraged to grow Moringa so that the leaves
[Guest]: are used. Leaves are an extremely great source of nutrition and protein. And again, this is
[Guest]: something which is sold by the roadside. So Moringa is one. Dried fish is another product,
[Guest]: which again is falling out of fashion completely. And in Bombay, in particular, dried fish is very
[Guest]: intrinsic to Bombay. You could say that dried fish was one of the things that almost founded
[Guest]: Bombay. Because if you look back at the history of Bombay, you know, Bombay was a very poor place.
[Guest]: I mean, it has very little to recommend itself. It had a harbour, but that was about it. I mean,
[Guest]: there were no natural products, there was nothing really. It had coconut trees, and it had dried
[Guest]: fish. I mean, dried Bombay duck, basically. And you can read reports, the British moaning and
[Guest]: groaning about the smell of dried fish, you know, just like even now, today, in sort of swanky
[Guest]: neighbourhoods like Bandra, or Warsaw, you have people trying to stop the, you know, the fishermen's
[Guest]: colonies drying fish, because it's the smell is reducing the value of all these really expensive
[Guest]: apartments. And yet dried fish is intrinsic to Bombay. It was a very important product for a
[Guest]: very simple reason. During the monsoons, the boats couldn't go out. And so, you didn't get fish. So,
[Guest]: you had to have dried fish. Dried fish was your key protein source, which tied you to over the
[Guest]: monsoon months. And there's a whole range of dishes that the traditional Bombay communities,
[Guest]: like the Pathare Prabhus or the CKPs, cook, which use dried fish. They're vegetable dishes,
[Guest]: which use dried fish or dried shrimp to add flavour. They're delicious dishes. Because,
[Guest]: you know, just a little bit of dried shrimp or dried fish adds a great depth to your dish. It's
[Guest]: like the way fish sauce is used in Thai food or Southeast Asian food. But unfortunately,
[Guest]: we've stopped cooking these dishes, because there's one uncomfortable fact about dried fish,
[Guest]: it really smells. And now that we live in apartment buildings, and now that we have
[Guest]: enclosed kitchens, the dried fish smell is really hard to get, the neighbours will complain.
[Guest]: No restaurant wants to serve dried fish dishes, because what they say is that the smell will
[Guest]: come into the dining room. Hotel restaurants can't serve dried fish dishes, because they
[Guest]: sell this, the stink will come into the hotel rooms. So, these dried fish dishes, which are
[Guest]: really delicious, nutritious, and important to India, are completely vanishing from our lives.
[Guest]: What else? Moringa, dried fish?
[Guest]: Moringa, dried fish, well, banana flower, you know, green jackfruit, all these
[Guest]: things that are becoming trendy abroad. I mean, these are all the sort of like,
[Guest]: foods that people really should try and experiment with.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me something. I mean, earlier in the episode, we were talking about restaurants and
[Amit Varma]: how you know, I had done an episode with Ashok Malik about TV channels. And he made an interesting
[Amit Varma]: point there that the license cost of TV channels, just setting up and running them is so incredibly
[Amit Varma]: high, that they end up aiming for the lowest common denominator, and you don't get enough
[Amit Varma]: variety and diversity. And the same point has been made by, for example, Amit Doshi of IVM
[Amit Varma]: podcast, who partner with me in producing the scene in the unseen, where he talks about radio,
[Amit Varma]: and he says that, you know, you look at the diversity of radio in New York and contrast
[Amit Varma]: it with India, where the license fees are so high, that lowest common denominator.
[Amit Varma]: So everyone's churning out Bollywood music. And you pointed out at the start of this episode,
[Amit Varma]: that it's the same with restaurants, that restaurants are fundamentally such an expensive,
[Amit Varma]: high investment business because of real estate and blah, blah, blah, that they aim for the
[Amit Varma]: lowest common denominator. In your early days as a restaurant critic, this frustrated you,
[Amit Varma]: because I presume you'd get the same butter chicken everywhere. Is this changing? I mean,
[Amit Varma]: because culturally, I think, in a sense, you have more openness and more influences coming in even
[Amit Varma]: from outside. But a lot of the new restaurants that I see, and this is obviously my bias,
[Amit Varma]: because I'm a relatively westernized elite here. A lot of the new restaurants I see will be like
[Amit Varma]: molecular gastronomy kind of restaurants and more influences from the West. But is is a diversity
[Amit Varma]: of Indian food beyond what the West has sent back to us finding any kind of expression?
[Guest]: I think there are a few positive signs. I mean, one of them actually is YouTube.
[Guest]: You know, a lot of people have realized that YouTube is a great way to chronicle recipes.
[Guest]: There are so many YouTube channels or YouTube videos of Indian housewives making very traditional
[Guest]: Indian recipes that are really useful. Because I mean, you are allowed to see the sort of slight
[Guest]: hand movements, you know, especially when you're making something like rotis. It's very minute
[Guest]: things like the hand, how you roll the dough, whether you throw a little bit of water on the
[Guest]: tawa to create a bit of steam before you put the bakri on it, which prevents the bakri from sticking
[Guest]: on the tawa. These are the very subtle things which are sometimes very hard to write in a recipe.
[Guest]: But YouTube allows you to capture that. So I think one of the really important things that's
[Guest]: happening is that YouTube is allowing a lot of people to chronicle a lot of very traditional
[Guest]: Indian recipes. I mean, I'm not saying that the videos are often great. I mean, often the picture
[Guest]: quality is a bit iffy and things like that. But at least the recipes are being chronicled.
[Guest]: I think the fact that it's becoming easier to publish a book is allowing a lot of people to
[Guest]: publish very traditional recipes. In the last 10 years, most of the really fascinating cookbooks,
[Guest]: I know, that chronicle traditional Indian recipes have been self-published.
[Guest]: What would you recommend for my listeners?
[Guest]: I mean, it's hard to recommend these because, you know, they're very hard to get by the nature of
[Guest]: being self-published, because, you know, they're often not available on Amazon or places like that.
[Guest]: But there are amazing community initiatives, nearly all run by women, which are chronicling
[Guest]: traditional recipes. And, you know, one amazing cookbook is a book called Dadi Mano Varso,
[Guest]: which means the grandmother's treasury, which is an attempt to chronicle the recipes of the
[Guest]: Palanpuri Jains. Now, if you know anything about the Palanpuri Jains, they're a really interesting
[Guest]: community, because they're very rich, because they're the community that controls the diamond
[Guest]: business. And so, you know, they're across the world, wherever diamonds are traded and sold
[Guest]: and cut. But because they're so spread out, a lot of the people in the Palanpuri Jain community
[Guest]: have started worrying that they are going to lose out the very traditional Palanpuri Jain recipes.
[Guest]: And these are recipes that are interesting for multiple reasons. One, obviously, they're Jain,
[Guest]: so they won't cook a lot of like root vegetables and things like that. So they use things like
[Guest]: fruits, like guavas and, you know, fruits and a lot of dried vegetables, desert vegetables,
[Guest]: because Palanpur is very close to Rajasthan. So you have a lot of like those sort of dried
[Guest]: Rajasthani vegetables, which are used in their cooking. So a group of women in Bombay,
[Guest]: got together and decided to chronicle the recipes. And because they had money, they were able to put
[Guest]: a lot of money into doing it. It's an amazing cookbook. It's half in Gujarati, half in English,
[Guest]: because they wanted to make it really accessible. It costs about 650 rupees to buy, which is much
[Guest]: less than the cost of production. But it's an absolutely detailed, painstaking chronicling
[Guest]: of every part of the community's cooking down to the utensils that are used. And you know,
[Guest]: all the traditional dried ingredients that are going to making Palanpuri Jain food.
[Guest]: And like that, there are different community initiatives. Sometimes they're not community
[Guest]: initiatives, sometimes just a family. It's becoming very common now for people to do
[Guest]: tribute cookbooks to their mothers or their grandmothers. And these books are always interesting.
[Guest]: I mean, I have a huge collection of them, simply because they have one or two offbeat,
[Guest]: really unusual recipes, which are chronicled in them. I mean, what would be great was if some way
[Guest]: these books could become available, you know, on Amazon. And to some extent that's happening. I
[Guest]: mean, there are a few print on demand producers. I mean, there's a company called Notion Press in
[Guest]: Chennai, which is doing this. And they are offering a sort of pejorative term for this
[Guest]: is vanity publishing. But basically, it's publishing for you. And you you chronicle it.
[Guest]: And they produce a nice quality book, and they put it on Amazon, they get the ISBN number,
[Guest]: and they do all that back and stuff. And they'll even do an ebook if you want it.
[Guest]: And it's these sort of publishers, who are not the big well known publishers,
[Guest]: who I think are doing an amazing job in helping a lot of Indian cooking get documented.
[Amit Varma]: So that might keep the recipes alive, but are ingredients getting extinct?
[Guest]: I mean, it's some ingredients like all the banana varieties are definitely becoming harder to find.
[Guest]: But again, I mean, I try to be hopeful. And I think what is helping here is the growth of
[Guest]: traditional markets, or the growth of farmers markets, small markets, people really becoming
[Guest]: interested in these sort of things who are trying to make these recipes available. Many of these
[Guest]: ingredients are being promoted for health benefits, which may or may not be true. I mean,
[Guest]: not all of them are what they're touted to be. But if people believe that because they're healthy,
[Guest]: they're going to keep consuming it, then I'm all for it.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm going to sort of, I've taken a lot of your time, I'm going to end this episode by asking
[Amit Varma]: you a question or version of which I ask all my guests on the topic of their expertise. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, what I realized talking about Indian food with you is that talking about Indian food,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense is talking about globalization, right? Because all of Indian food, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: this globalization has been with us for 1000s of years, right? And all of Indian food is basically,
[Amit Varma]: you know, to use a cliched phrase, a melting pot, right? And, and we see the same process
[Amit Varma]: of globalization now accelerating and bringing about, you know, different manifestations of it,
[Amit Varma]: in some cases, you have, you know, supermarkets driving out local markets, and you know,
[Amit Varma]: Cavendish driving out all our different kinds of bananas, but equally, you have our recipes
[Amit Varma]: proliferating on YouTube, and so on and so forth. So my two part question, what makes you hopeful?
[Amit Varma]: And what makes you despair about the trends of globalization with reference to Indian food?
[Guest]: Well, what makes me hopeful, I think, is the fact that I started off by saying that the fact that
[Guest]: I started writing about food writing, because I could talk to anybody about food,
[Guest]: food is the one thing that connects everyone, and everybody is interested in food, you can talk to
[Guest]: anyone about food and their food memories, and their food experiences, and you have a way of
[Guest]: connecting with everybody. So we're dealing with something that is of a lot of interest to people.
[Guest]: I mean, we can see it in the way that politicians often use food metaphors, you know, in their
[Guest]: speeches, because they know that food connects with people at a very primal level. So I think
[Guest]: we're dealing with something that is very basic, that is very that really literally hits people at
[Guest]: a gut level. And it's always easy to interest people in food. So that's the positive side.
[Guest]: The thing that makes me a bit, I don't know, despairing, but definitely sad, is that people
[Guest]: don't open their minds, and they don't want to experiment with food, they become very closed.
[Guest]: And you know, one thing that I find particularly depressing is the sort of rigidity with which we're
[Guest]: getting into the vegetarian, non vegetarian divide, which was essentially not something that
[Guest]: was there in India in the past. I mean, yes, you had some vegetarians, and you had a few people
[Guest]: who ate a lot of meat, but those people were traditionally, you know, just a very few rich
[Guest]: people. Most people ate a sort of mixed diet, which was largely vegetarian, but many of them
[Guest]: did eat meat in small doses. Sometimes, as I said, we were talking about dried fish as flavorings in
[Guest]: their food. And these are very important, very nutritious, completely delicious dishes. And they're
[Guest]: getting completely lost, because we are seeing a polarization between vegetarian and non vegetarian.
[Guest]: Vegetarians are becoming fanatically vegetarian, they won't even eat eggs or any kind of meat.
[Guest]: And sadly enough, non vegetarians also becoming fanatically non vegetarian, because if you want
[Guest]: they want to eat chicken, they just want to eat chicken, you know, they just want to eat full on
[Amit Varma]: meat. For many North Indians it's almost a macho thing. Or they do keto diets like you do.
[Guest]: So yeah, there's a macho element. Exactly, you know, and people are more prosperous,
[Guest]: which is a good thing. I mean, we should never be sad that people are prosperous. I mean,
[Guest]: that's awful. And because they're prosperous, they want more meat. And that's, you know,
[Guest]: prosperity is always a good thing. But it's a bit sad if they define prosperity as only eating meat.
[Guest]: And in the process, I think a lot of traditional Indian foods are getting lost. I mean,
[Guest]: what I call these semi vegetarian foods, which are very important, delicious dishes,
[Guest]: the nutritious dishes, and the environmentally important dishes, because I mean, there is
[Guest]: certainly a cost that is being attached to this huge rise in meat consumption. There's a cost
[Guest]: that is coming in things like the rising antibiotic use, there's an ethical cost,
[Guest]: which is coming in the ill treatment of animals. And, you know, this is something I think,
[Guest]: food writers will have to grapple with. Like a lot of people, I have mixed feelings about the
[Guest]: vegan movement. But I think the vegan movement is really challenging us to think about essential
[Guest]: things like how is it possible if you are well off and again, this is a position that comes from a
[Guest]: position of luxury, I will never, I do not think you can ever tell a person who's starving, like
[Guest]: don't eat meat. But if you're a well off person, and you have the option of not eating meat from
[Guest]: the sort of industrial production of meat, where you know that there is so much abuse of animals,
[Guest]: the rampant use of antibiotics, how can you continue to eat meat unquestioningly? I'm not
[Guest]: saying don't eat meat. I'm saying question it. And India actually has a solution to all of these
[Guest]: issues to many of these issues. Vegan food is natural to India in a way that it is not in most
[Guest]: parts of the world. We have these vast vegan, vegetarian, semi vegetarian traditions. And we're
[Guest]: forgetting those. And I think that's a bit sad. So that would have been a good note to end. But
[Amit Varma]: I thought of another question to ask you, when you mentioned the ethical dilemmas of meat eating,
[Amit Varma]: which is, I think at some point in the future, it's only a question of when we can argue about
[Amit Varma]: but at some point is definitely going to happen that is going to become commercially viable to
[Amit Varma]: have lab grown meat. Absolutely. When no animal was killed, you've just basically synthesized an
[Amit Varma]: entire animal, right? And it looks like chicken, it tastes like chicken, but it was never alive
[Amit Varma]: to begin with. It's fascinating. And it's fascinating. And that's going to happen. And
[Amit Varma]: when that happens, I can imagine that someone like you would respond in two ways. The negative
[Amit Varma]: response would be that all food diversity is struck down the same way that you've been on the
[Amit Varma]: loss of the jungle fowl, right? That it hits food diversity, but ethically, then it's a great boon,
[Guest]: because it'll be it'll be a great boon. And I think it's a reminder to us that, you know,
[Guest]: tradition, diversity, I mean, are all important things. But there are other issues like
[Guest]: animal welfare, health, environmental costs that also have to be taken into account.
[Amit Varma]: That's a fantastic note to end the episode on. Thanks so much for coming on the show,
[Amit Varma]: Vikram. I learned a lot from you today. Great.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do hop on over to audiomatic.in and listen to all 48
[Amit Varma]: episodes of Vikram's brilliant podcast, The Real Food Podcast. It's genius. Also, please Google
[Amit Varma]: his name. He's written hundreds of brilliant pieces on food over the decades, among other
[Amit Varma]: subjects, and an hour spent entering the rabbit hole of Vikram Doctor's writing is an hour well
[Amit Varma]: spent indeed. Vikram doesn't happen to be on much social media, but you can follow me on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. And you can browse past episodes of the seen and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: at seenunseen.in or thinkpragati.com. Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Do you have a night routine? Well, everyone has one. And the to-do list usually looks like this.
[Unknown]: Brush your teeth, set that alarm, get into your pajamas and switch off those screens.
[Unknown]: But here's one more to add to that list. Tune into the Positively Unlimited podcast
[Unknown]: for a dose of positive action and tips on how to build powerful mindsets. Episodes out every
[Unknown]: Monday on the IBM Podcast app, ibmpodcast.com, or wherever you tune into podcasts.